who has been with the College of Education since
before it was a college of education. And he's
going to share some of his perceptions of things
that have occurred and changes that have come
about in the college, and what might have created
some of them, and where we are, where we might be
going. So starting with the beginning, you came? I
came
to A&M in 1961. OK. as a counselor in the Counseling
Testing Service and a part-time assistant
professor of psychology in the then Department of
Education and Psychology, as it was known at that
time. I taught part-time there until 1969.
when the College of Education was formed out of the
Department of Education, the departments, Ag
Education, Industrial Education, Health and
Physical Education, curriculum instruction and
stuff like that. And I became an associate
professor of educational psychology at that time
and associate dean of the new college. under W.R.
Hubert. What were your duties as Associate Dean?
Associate Dean for Student Personnel Services.
Is that what Brian Cole is right now? That's right.
And Dr. Limbacher was? Dr. Limbacher was that
before him. And then you were before Limbacher? I
was the first one, yeah. And I was that for two
years.
But
I wrote the proposal for the, I should say I
finished writing the proposal presented to the
Coordinating Board in Austin for formation of the
College of Education. Oh, I see. I have a copy of
that. The proposal. And I presented it. It all
happened pretty fast. It wasn't a long drawn out
thing, right? Right. Dean Frank W.R. Hubert in
1961 was dean of the College of Arts and Science,
Texas A&M University. And then he split off from
that college, the College of Business, the
College of Science, the College of Geoscience,
the College of Liberal Arts, and the College of
Education. One by one, he split those away, and of
course he, being an educator, chose to keep the
College of
Education.
It changed and happened as the college began to
evolve. Always, though, the mission has still
remained the teaching, the research, and the
service. In your opinion, has that changed
drastically in focus from the Hubert era to the
Corrigan era or in between? No, I don't think it's
changed. Our emphasis on the preparation of
teachers still has always been there.
Search and service has been carried on in many
different ways. There was a laboratory for human
learning in the Department of Education and
Psychology which moved over to the Department of
Psychology. There was a human learning
laboratory which was and still is over in the of
health and physical education. Of course, that
emphasis was on physical performance instead of
intellectual performance of students. I don't
know what else. Now, go ahead. OK. One of the things
that I have been talking about with different
department people is how this growth and these
changes have affected your ability to work with
students. In graduate programs, it's not as
pronounced as it is in the undergraduate level as
far as the growth, because this department has
been pretty stable as far as growth, right? I mean,
there's a limit to the growth here in this
department, whereas there is not that in some
others. Well, within this department now, when
you get off the College of Education and begin to
talk about the department itself, there have been
some rather drastic changes. At one time, we spent
about 90% of our time in terms of courses and
professors preparing people to be special
education
chief counselors and school counselors. Later
they added school psychologists to the
preparation, but the preparation of school
counselors has decreased over the years.
probably less than 10% of our department is
concerned with preparation of school
counselors. And we are now concerned with the
preparation of school psychologists, special
education teachers, and independently
practicing psychologists and researchers at the
PhD level.
This has been a change from the early days when we
were almost all school counseling. Do you see a lot
of collaboration, or has there been a lot of
collaboration, not only within the department,
but among departments in the college? Well, we've
always had some joint appointments. Several
people had joint appointments between
curriculum instruction and educational
psychology. We now have joint appointments with
the Student Counseling Service and the
Department of Educational Psychology. And we now
have some... By joint appointments? Not exactly
joint appointments. Both people are listed as
adjunct
professors. Some that are working in the
counseling? They're working full-time in the
student counseling service, but they teach a
course for us. Oh, I see. OK. And likewise, with a
couple of local psychiatrists who are listed as
adjunct professors in the department. We've
never had that before. And we now have that where
we'll have people off campus doing work with
campus in terms of research and service.
If you're talking about the department also, then
you'd have to talk about one major aspect of it,
which is the Student Counseling Service. I don't
mean Student Counseling Service, I mean the
Counseling and Assessment Clinic. We have here on
the seventh floor in connection with the
department. This is in effect a teaching
laboratory, but one which takes referrals from
physicians and counselors and psychologists and
progression workers within 150 or 200 miles of
campus for special workups. All of the work being
done by our students and supervised by a licensed
psychologist
so that in effect it is a miniature mental health
facility. When did that come about? It came about
in 1972, I believe,
and began to use the laboratory as it was set up in
this building. This building was designed mostly
by, I think, by Dean Hubert. And the teaching
laboratories, the science teaching
laboratories, counseling laboratories,
reading laboratories, all designed into the
basic building structure. And when we moved into
the building
in 1973, that's when the laboratory began. Where
is that located, up here somewhere? On the seventh
floor. Okay.
Do you have some perceptions on how outsiders view
the College of Education in general? Not just
outsiders meaning the other colleges, but even
beyond that. By outsiders you mean other
professional educators or laymen? Other, well,
either or both. Outside educators see it as a sort
of a this kind of thing, because I think that it's a
little bit harder to get into and to finish teacher
training, counselor training, and whatever at
this institution, which may be a reflection of the
institution more than it is of the College of
Education in particular. That's the way some
professional people might see it. Lay people
around the country, how do they see it?
We have our practice teachers in all kinds of
schools from Fort Worth to Houston. To San
Antonio. And San Antonio. That doesn't
particularly concern just the department here.
It concerns the whole College of Education. There
have been some efforts to do basic research
through various school districts. from school
districts that I'm aware of. We also taught some
off-campus courses for years and we finally got
out of this business. We taught off-campus
courses in Galveston and San Tom and Houston and El
Paso and Amarillo and Waco that I can remember
right now. Why was that discontinued?
For economic reasons and political reasons, as
far as I can tell, they didn't want us competing
unfairly with the local campuses there.
I taught courses in Galveston where I traveled out
one night a week and talked to teachers and others
from the local school districts down there. I
thought it was good educational experience for
those people who wanted to get credit in this
university, but they could not afford to travel up
here.
The argument against it was that they didn't have
access to the library, and to a position with other
professors and other graduate students. But I
think this was overcome some by the fact that they
were all professionals teaching in the field. And
at the same time, they were getting a course. They
were practicing their profession at the same
time. OK. What about your crystal ball for the
future? Do you have some? Well, let me mention one
other community project.
Three years ago, the Houston School District had a
lack of Latin American counselors in the system.
And there was a joint contract between HISD and the
Department of Education and Psychology, College
of Education, to prepare. And we took 24 classroom
teachers and in two years time we gave them our
counseling curriculum and everything. And the
counselors finished our program here. The HISD
paid a lot of their expenses. Books, tuition,
stuff like that. So it has some minority
counselors
in the Houston system. All those people have
upheld the high traditions of the department in
terms of subsequent productivity, jobs,
promotion, stuff like that. I was really an
example of the kind of cooperation, I think, that a
college or university campus can have on their
local students. By the way, some of those courses
were taught off campus. All the courses in San
Antonio, myself? Yes. Okay. Do you think there's
going to be great changes in the very near future? I
know this new Bill 994 is going to affect a lot of the
undergraduate teacher cooperation. How do you
feel about that? What does the future bode for us? A
few years back, they predicted a huge overage of
teachers to be a false prediction because there
was a shortage instead of an overage of teachers.
Because not only did we hit the second generation
of baby boomers, but because a lot of people in the
teaching profession became disenchanted and
left the teaching profession. So that's what
caused the shortage in the the last three years. As
we move into the era of smaller class size, not only
at the elementary level, but at some of the upper
levels, I think there will be more demand for
teachers and counselors, especially education
teachers. As you know, this department has an
experimental program six years in length in which
we prepare special education teachers who will
finish the six years with a master's degree,
certification, and one year's internship type
experience in public schools. That's almost
close to what the proposal is going to be for the new
five year program. Yeah. Well, this will be a
six-year program, and you'd have to go to Doug
Palmer to get the full description of that. You
already have it in place, or you're looking at it?
No, it's in place. That's the only way we sign up,
special education people. And you may want to talk
to Dr. Palmer briefly about that, that special
education program, that six-year program. Okay.
All of them are in that six-year program, all
special ed people then? All of them. We enroll from
now on. Oh, from now on. From now on. Okay. We're
getting the fall of it, 87. Okay. Dr. Hope, what
about some of the highlights, and you've gone
through a lot of things and a lot of changes and so
forth, and you've contributed a lot. Can you share
some insights or maybe an anecdote or two? What do
you feel the best about what you've done since
you've been at Texas A&M? Down through the years?
Right. Well, when I was a part-time professor and a
full-time counselor over in the Counseling and
Testing Center, Mm-hmm. We were charged with
doing the research which
convinced the board and the constituents to
become coeducational.
We did a survey of the surrounding communities to
find out how many women would come to Texas A&M if
they had the opportunity and could not go anywhere
else. Who gave you that charge? President Rutter.
then President Rudder.
We also, as a part of our work there, the research
part of our work there, we were given the charge to
examine the
distribution of grants from the National Science
Foundation to the various colleges and
universities of the United States. And that study
was taken to Washington by Congressman Teague and
used to cause a lot more grants to come the way of
Texas A&M. I'm talking now about science and
technology. That study we did at President
Rutter's request. One
of the first things we did was initiate the use of
the Scholastic Attitude Test for admission
purposes to the university. That was my first job
here in 1961, was to do a validating study of the SAT
and the students in the university at that time. I
think one of the most exciting things was that they
predicted that as we raised our entrance
requirements, that is, SAT and graduate school
grade point ratio, that we would cut the size of the
freshman class. Well, this happened for perhaps
one year, maybe 1963. Then from then on, instead of
having fewer students, we had more and more
students of higher quality. Do you think that's
going to continue now that we've raced it yet
again? Yes, it will continue in my opinion.
College of Business had the same experience with
the GRE. And we were given the job also of
administering the GRE to every graduating senior
at A&M and doing a validation study for it. And it
was this, and that was 1965, 4 or 5, somewhere along
in there. We didn't even require the GRE for
graduate school until much later than that. With
that information, the president went out and
began to beef up the departments that showed low
scores on achievement. And he began to draw
attention to those that had high scores on
achievements. The president or the dean? The
president. She
asked me about the whole university, and that's
why we didn't have a college of education in those
days. That's true, that's right. You also worked,
I'm dividing my study I think into the two eras, the
Hubert era and the Corrigan era. Can you tell me a
little bit about the the contrast in the two. I know
there's been a lot, I mean, I've gotten a lot on the
different leadership styles and so forth. Do you
have any, you know, a certain observation on that?
Dean Hubert seemed to keep his
touch at all times to all facets of the college
operation. This is not to say that he was not
flexible in any way whatsoever, but he knew an
awful lot about what was going on at a departmental
level, and he took responsibility for directing
some of that work. My perception of Dean Kurgan,
while I wasn't in the office with Dean Kurgan,
is that he is more likely to give a general charge to
a department or a facet within the college of
education and leave the execution of that to them.
I would say that you'd have to say that both deans
were intimately involved in the statewide scene.
Frank Hubert, before he became dean of Texas A&M,
was in the Texas Education Agency itself. had an
intimate knowledge of the functioning inside
that thing. After Dean Kurgan came, he was on the
governor's select committee and he was deeply
involved in the suggestions which led to the law.
You'd have to say that Texas A&M, the deans of
education for the past
have been very active in the state scene about
what's happening to education. Which has been
beneficial to the College of Education office.
Right. Okay. In closing, do you have any remarks or
anything that you would be helpful in for me to kind
of tie all those little ends together as to looking
at the- The history of the College of Education.
Well, if
you went way back, you'd find that the first
education courses were taught in ag education.
You may be aware of that. The first psychology
course was taught in 1916 in the department of
rural sociology, I believe. And one considers
that the first college courses in the whole United
States were only taught We had a course here in 1916
that indicated we had some forward looking
people. Are you still full-time or are you
semi-retired now? No, I'm taking early
retirement and I'm what we call a half-time person
now. I had 25 years, 26 years here and half-time in
September. What are you doing with your other
half-time? Oh, I work a little bit for Greenleaf
Psychiatric Hospital, where we have a lot of our
students and faculty working in the mental health
area. And we do a lot of work there. Okay. That's an
unofficial remark, of course. Well, I appreciate
your time and your perceptions and your insights
and you've made me aware of some things that I was
not aware of as far as, you know, studies and things
and how they came about. And do you have anything
that you have written yourself? I mean, have you
ever recorded any of your, you know, thoughts? No,
we did an informal Phi Delta Kappa a few years back
when we organized the chapter. Had a little
research grant for Dr. Barker and Dr. McCandless
and I in which we looked at, you know, incidents of
male elementary school teachers. Because we felt
like one of the facts we had was a male figure for
elementary school children to identify with. And
of course we documented with that little study the
fact that there was a huge preponderance of
females elementary level, even in the
principal's office. There was a huge group of
hundreds of females in that office. And I contrast
this
as only a slight change from the times when not only
were you supposed to be female to teach elementary
school,
If you got married, you had to quit. Especially if
you got married and got pregnant, you had to quit
teaching. Well, there's a little bit of change
over the years with respect to that. I also did a
study for Southwest Athletic Conference as part
of my faculty response military where we studied
prediction of grade point ratios for the whole
university in order to set standards
And in this respect we studied all males, not just
male athletes, at the nine Southwest Conference
schools. And it was with this study that we
demonstrated the usable
qualities as far as SAT and grade point ratio are
concerned of the various schools. Have you done
any of your memoirs of anything? No. Never? I have
not. Are you going to now that you have all this
time? That's a good thought. I've had some
experience. I think you should. You know, one of
the reasons I... I hope I can finish this. I do thank
you for your time, and I hope if I have some
questions I can come back.